---
title: "Writing sucks"
date: 2022-07-28T14:56:57-06:00
tags: ["rants"]
draft: false
---

Writing is a lossy format. I write with the intention to express my thoughts and ideas. Before I write
something, I feel like I have something coherent, something meaningful, and something definite. The moment I
start writing, I realize that it is not the case. Sometimes I feel like I'm convincing myself by writing that
the words on the page are in fact my intentions, but it's not. An inextricable gap between the shape of my
thoughts and the words on the page forms.

What is the shape of a thought? When I imagine a building, I feel like I have a coherent idea of what that
building is. Most importantly, it is very clear to me that this building I'm thinking of is in fact a
building! But when I try to think about the details of this building, the number of floors it has, the number
of windows, the precise shape, the entrance, the materials its made of, where the restrooms are, or any
possible aspect of an infinitely complex set of choices, it becomes ever more obvious to me that I never
really had a coherent idea of what a building is. Strangely, the harder and harder I look, the blurrier the
image gets.

It makes me wonder which one is flawed -- my imagination or the medium. Is it necessarily the case that my
imagination was lacking? It could also be the case that when I think of a building, I'm thinking of the
amorphous collective of all buildings that I've seen. Perhaps what is really happening is that when I'm
observing the details of the building, I'm flattening out what is a beautifully complex image, an abstraction
of what a building is into a single possibility.

Similarly, perhaps my thoughts unexpressed have a finer quality to them. The moment I try to express it in
words, to linearize it, to reduce it to what is representable on a page, I kill the essence of the idea and
leave it as only a single arrangement of thoughts.

In balance, I don't think writing actually sucks. I find writing to be literally creative -- I write
something, and whether it's the process of writing or the shape of the words on the page that beckons back at
me, I consistently find myself with new thoughts. It's a rather unnatural and frankly remarkable process, for
a thought to be created in a closed system.

I do, however, trust and respect my 'thoughts' more than the words that I write. To some extent, I've got no
other choice. Colloquially, I think this is translates to "trust your instincts". When a dissonance manifests
between my thoughts and my writing, my first instinct is to try to extract what I *really* think, rather than
invalidate my thoughts. And extracting truth from yourself is difficult work.
